[DOC] Tutorial: small corrections (#205)
seqan/raptor: doc/tutorial/02_layout/index.md

# IBF vs HIBF

> Raptor works with the Interleaved Bloom Filter by default. A new feature is the Hierarchical Interleaved Bloom Filter

Reviewer: that is is not true yet @eseiler is it? :D

We would need to tackle this soon then.

Reviewer 2: How do you understand that sentence?
I kinda read it as: "IBF is the default", which is true. For HIBF, you need the layout, etc.

Reviewer: Ups I misread it.

(HIBF) (raptor::hierarchical_interleaved_bloom_filter). This uses an almost always more space-saving method of storing

> the bins (the HIBF is only not smaller if all bins are the same size). It distinguishes between the user bins, which

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the bins (except if the input samples are all of the same size). It distinguishes between the *user bins*, which
```

> reflect the individual samples as before, and the so-called technical bins, which merges some bins together and splits

Reviewer: ```suggestion
reflect the individual input samples, and the *technical bins*, which are physical storage units within the HIBF. *Technical bins* may store a single user bin, a split part of a user bin or several (merged) user bins.
```

# IBF vs HIBF

Raptor works with the Interleaved Bloom Filter by default. A new feature is the Hierarchical Interleaved Bloom Filter
(HIBF) (raptor::hierarchical_interleaved_bloom_filter). This uses an almost always more space-saving method of storing
the bins (except if the input samples are all of the same size). It distinguishes between the *user bins*, which reflect
the individual input samples, and the *technical bins*, which are physical storage units within the HIBF.

> *Technical bins* may store a single user bin, a split part of a user bin or several (merged) user bins. This is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*Technical bins* may store a single user bin, a split part of a user bin, or several (merged) user bins. This is
```

> especially useful when there are samples of very different sizes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
especially useful when samples vary dramatically in size.
```

[HyperLogLog (HLL) sketches](http://algo.inria.fr/flajolet/Publications/FlFuGaMe07.pdf) of the input data. These HLL
sketches are stored in a directory and will be used in computing an HIBF layout. We will go into more detail later
\ref HLL. The HIBF layout tries to minimize the disk space consumption of the resulting index. The space is estimated
using a k-mer count per user bin which represents the potential density in a technical bin in an Interleaved Bloom
filter.

\note
The term representative indicates that the k-mer content could be transformed by a function which reduces its size and

> distribution, e.g. using minimizers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
distribution, e.g. by using minimizers.
```

To create an index and thus a layout, the individual samples of the data set are chopped up into k-mers and determine in
their so-called bin the specific bit setting of the Bloom Filter by passing them through hash functions. This means that
a k-mer from sample `i` marks in bin `i` with `j` hash functions `j` bits with a `1`.

Example:
Query ACGT with kmers ACG, CGT.
Sample 1: AATGT, Sample 2: ACCGT, Sample 3: ACGTA
2 Hash funktions
-> Bins 1 to 3 for ACG could look like |0000|0000|0101|
   Bins 1 to 3 for CGT could look like |0000|0110|1100|
-> The query seems to match Sample 3

> 

Author: @eseiler do you have an image for this?

Reviewer 2: Is this the first time, we explain how this work? Otherwise, I would just reference the other part.

This also seems a bit too detailed?
If we do it here, we could also think about just explaining a plain Bloom Filter. The principle is the same.

Author: I added this example, because of this discussion: https://github.com/seqan/raptor/pull/201#discussion_r1047309453
We have also a really short explanation of a BF and IBF here: https://github.com/seqan/raptor/blob/main/doc/tutorial/03_index/index.md#general-idea--main-parameters.
Should we merge these explanations? Or would you leave just this one out as its too detailed?

To create an index and thus a layout, the individual samples of the data set are chopped up into k-mers and determine in
their so-called bin the specific bit setting of the Bloom Filter by passing them through hash functions. This means that
a k-mer from sample `i` marks in bin `i` with `j` hash functions `j` bits with a `1`.

Example:
Query ACGT with kmers ACG, CGT.
Sample 1: AATGT, Sample 2: ACCGT, Sample 3: ACGTA
2 Hash funktions
-> Bins 1 to 3 for ACG could look like |0000|0000|0101|
   Bins 1 to 3 for CGT could look like |0000|0110|1100|
-> The query seems to match Sample 3

If a query is then searched, its k-mers are thrown into the hash functions and looked at in which bins it only points
to ones. This can also result in false positives. Thus, the result only indicates that the query is probably part of a

> sample.

Reviewer 2: Down below when mentioning the `https://hur.st/bloomfilter/` website, we should mention that the number of inserted elements is the number of kmers in a single bin, and you want to use the biggest bin to be sure.

Thinking about it, does it fit here? Because the layout kinda does all the computations for you?
It does fit, if we rephrase it a bit like: You can look for optimal parameter settings, because we don't optimize the number of hash functions

Author: I copied this paragraph from the index tutorial because I thought you might need it here too. But I can also take it out completely. -> https://github.com/seqan/raptor/blob/main/doc/tutorial/03_index/index.md#general-idea--main-parameters

However, if we are unlucky and come across a hash value that consists of only `0`'s, then \f$p_{max}\f$ is of course
maximum of all possible hash values, no matter how many different elements are actually present.
To avoid this, we cut the stream of hash values into `m` substreams and use the first `b` bits of each hash value to
determine into which substream it belongs. From these we then calculate the *harmonic mean* as the total \f$p_{max}\f$.

We can influence this m with `--sketch-bits`. `m` must be a power of two so that we can divide the `64` bit evenly, so
we use `--sketch-bits` to set a `b` with \f$m = 2^b\f$.

If we choose our `b` (`m`) to be very large, then we need more memory but get higher accuracy. (Storage consumption is
growing exponentially.) In addition, calculating the layout can take longer with a high `b` (`m`).  If we have many user

> bins and observe a long runtime, then it is worth choosing a somewhat smaller `b` (`m`). Furthermore, the relative error

Reviewer: ```suggestion
bins and observe a long layout computation time, then it is worth choosing a somewhat smaller `b` (`m`). Furthermore, the relative error
```

However, if we are unlucky and come across a hash value that consists of only `0`'s, then \f$p_{max}\f$ is of course
maximum of all possible hash values, no matter how many different elements are actually present.
To avoid this, we cut the stream of hash values into `m` substreams and use the first `b` bits of each hash value to

> determine into which substream it belongs. From these we then calculate the *harmonic mean* as the total \f$p_{max}\f$.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
determine into which substream it belongs. From these, we calculate the *harmonic mean* as the total \f$p_{max}\f$.
```

With `--max-rearrangement-ratio` you can further influence a part of the preprocessing (value between `0` and `1`). If
you set this value to `1`, it is switched off. If you set it to a very small value, you will also need more runtime and

> memory. If it is close to `1`, however, just little re-arranging is done,  which could result in a less memory-efficient

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
memory. If it is close to `1`, however, just little re-arranging is done, which could result in a less memory-efficient
```
